Polyether ether ketone (PEEK) and PEEK composites are viable candidates for orthopedic implants owing to their ability for modulus match of surrounding bone tissue.
The structural properties of these systems for load-bearing application in the body can be tailored by incorporating carbon fibers; to this end, polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and pitch fibers are commonly incorporated in the PEEK matrix.
Mechanical property optimization for a given medical application requires consideration of carbon fiber type and volume fraction, as well as processing conditions for the composite systems.
While much is known about the bulk mechanical properties of PEEK and PEEK composites, little is known about the nanomechanical properties of these systems.
Insight into nanoscale behavior can offer valuable information about fiber-matrix interactions that may influence long-term integrity of these biomaterials when used in load bearing medical device applications.
In this study, we utilize nanoindentation as a method to characterize mechanical behavior of clinical grade PEEK and PEEK composites.
We examine PEEK formulations with pitch and PAN fibers and evaluate a range of thermal treatments known to influence polymer microstructure.
We use a conospherical tip of 1.5 μm in radius and a conospherical tip of 20 μm radius to determine indentation modulus over different length scales.
We correlate these findings with previous characterization on these same PEEK systems using microindentation.
A novelty of this work is that we combine nanoindentation with k-means clustering to quantitatively discern the influence of heat treatment and carbon fiber type on the mechanical behavior of PEEK composites and their constituents.
We demonstrate that nanoindentation is an effective characterization tool for discerning fiber-matrix interactions and measuring the mechanical behavior in response to thermal treatment and carbon fiber type in PEEK composites.
Nanoindentation is shown to be a viable tool for characterizing complex biomaterials and can serve as an effective technique to guide optimization of microstructures for long-term structural applications in the body.
